# It Starts Now (Alan Watts)

This is therefore to say that the transformation of human consciousness through meditation is frustrated so long as we think of it in terms of something that I, myself, can bring about by some kind of angle or some sort of gimmick. You see, this leads to endless games of spiritual one-upmanship and guru competitions: "My guru is more effective than your guru," "My yoga is faster than your yoga," "I'm more aware of myself than you are," "I'm humbler than you are," "I'm sorrier for my sins than you are," "I love you more than you love me." These interminable goings-on cause people to fight and wonder whether they are a little bit more evolved than somebody else.

All of that can just fall away, and then we get this strange feeling that we have never had to see in our lives, except occasionally by accident. Some people get a glimpse that we are no longer this poor little stranger and afraid in a world it never made, but that you are this universe, and you are creating it at every moment. Because, you see, it starts now. It didn't begin in the past. There was no past. If the universe began in the past, when that happened, it was now. But it's still now, and the universe is still beginning now and trailing off like the wake of a ship. 

From now on, the wake of the ship fades out, and so does the past. You can look back there to explain things, but the explanation disappears. You never find it there. Things are not explained by the past; they're explained by what happens now, which creates the past, and it begins here. That's the birth of responsibility. Because, otherwise, you can always look over your shoulder and say, "Well, I'm the way I am because my mother dropped me, and she dropped me because she was neurotic, because her mother dropped her." Away we go back to Adam and Eve or a disappearing monkey or something. We never get at it. 

But, in this way, you're faced with it. You're doing all of this. That's an extraordinary job, so cheer up! You can't blame anyone else for the kind of world you're in. And if you know, you see, that I, in the sense of the person, the front, the ego, really doesn't exist, then it won't go to your head too badly if you wake up and discover that you're God.
